---
title: "Glasgow PhD 2014 - 2018"
collection: "struggles"
permalink: "/struggles/2018/"
venue: "Glasgow University, Computing Science"
location: "Glasgow, The UK"
---
<b>2014 - 2019: </b>
In 2014, I started my PhD at the university of Glasgow in the school
of Political Sciences. The PhD was about measuring the spatial and
temporal patterns of electoral violence which is the violence that happens
during elections. after 5 years of working on the PhD, my work did not
qualify as a PhD and I just got an MSc.
That was not surprising to me giving all the chaos
I went through from changing schools from Political Sciences
to Computing Sciences. My original first supervisor left the university
and my second supervisor retired. I could not develop my research
skills and I could not do a PhD. It was devastating and out of the
5 years, I needed 2 years of therapy to cope with
what was happening. After almost 3 years, I'm not at peace with it.
I keep thinking back to those 5 years and I feel that research might not
be my thing and I'll not be a researcher and I can't work in academia.

Everyday, On Twitter, I read about a successful PhD story which is great
and that's how it should be that successful PhDs outnumber unsuccessful one.

But they do exit and they could happen for many reasons.
A phD is not just a student working, it include many other factors.
Sometimes, things don't go our way and not all the factors are under control.

When, I was a PhD student, everyone told me you'll be fine and you'll get you PhD.
I passed 3 mini vivas in the university and I still did not.
No one told me about the unsuccessful stories so I can learn from them.

Writing this post is not easy to me. I spent the last 2 years trying to erase this memory.
As it it never happened but I always come back to it with every job application
and with all the successful PhD stories I hear about my PhD colleagues.
I can't help but thinking I should have had my PhD but I did not.
The aim of writing this post is to own it own my failure as a hope to make peace with it and
to tell people that it is not the end of the world and it is not the end of my academic life.
I might still apply for a new PhD nd finish it this time.
Failure is just another step towards any success in any field.
IT is hard just like flu but we getter better and stronger afterwards.
The people who look successful and shiny with long list of publications and citations are not different.
They too had their failures but they did not share them with the world.


