---
title: "Glasgow PhD 2014 - 2018"
collection: "struggles"
permalink: "/struggles/2018"
venue: "Glasgow University, Computing Science"
location: "Glasgow, The UK"
---
<b>2014 - 2019: </b>
In 2014, I started my PhD at the university of Glasgow in the school
of Political Sciences. The PhD was about measuring the spatial and
temporal patterns of electoral violence which is the violence that happens
during elections. After 5 years of working on the PhD, my work did not
qualify as a PhD and I just got an MSc.
That was not surprising to me giving all the chaos
with changing schools from Political Sciences
to Computing Sciences and my first supervisor left the university
and my second supervisor retired. I could not develop my research
skills and I could not do a PhD. It was devastating and I spent almost 2 years of therapy to cope with
what was happening. After almost 3 years, I'm not at peace with it.
Sometimes, I think back to those 5 years and I feel that research might not
be my thing and I'll not be a researcher and I can't work in academia.

Everyday, on Twitter, I read about a successful PhD story which is great
and that's how it should be that successful PhDs outnumber unsuccessful one. But unsuccessful or struggling PhDs do exit and they could happen for many reasons.
A PhD is not just a student working away, it includes many other factors. Sometimes, things don't go our way and not all the factors are under control.
When, I was a PhD student, everyone told me you'll be fine and you'll get your PhD.
I had passed 3 mini vivas in the university and I still did not get my PhD.
No one told me about the unsuccessful stories so I can learn from them. They just dismissed them as if they don't happen.

Writing this post is not easy for me. I spent the last 2 years trying to erase that memory.
As if it never happened but I always come back to it with every job application
and with all the success stories I hear about my PhD colleagues.
I can't help but thinking I should have had my PhD but I have not.


The aim of writing this post is to own it own my failure as a hope to make peace with it and
to tell people that it is not the end of the world and it is not the end of my academic life.
I might still apply for a new PhD and finish it this time.
Failure is just another step towards any success in any field. It is hard just like flu but we getter better and stronger afterwards.
The people who look successful and shiny with a long list of publications and citations are not different.
They too had their failures but they did not share them with the world.


